genes are at the core of our identity
they have recently been at the center of
stunning advances in medical diagnosis
gene therapy and Al and alteration Dr
sarta mukui is the author of a new book
The Gene and intimate history it is
published by an imprint of Simon and
Schuster a division of CBS he writes one
humbling fact about our understanding of
the human genome is how little we know
we're pleased to have him here first of
all congratulations on this and the
Pitzer for the biography of cancer thank
you very much uh the interesting thing
about it it's both promising and scary
mhm tell us why well it's promising
because as we learn more about human
genes we can diagnose diseases that we
didn't know how to diagnose before um
with things like uh genetic
interventions we can begin to cure some
diseases um it's a long Frontier there's
lots that we don't know but the
technology is advancing rapidly um and
I'm excited about that that's what makes
it promising The Perils the danger in
all of this is that we will start
intervening on the human genome um at a
time that we don't know very much about
it and there's there's an international
discussion while it's an embryo well
while it's an embryo or even in
embryonic stem cells where you know we
don't know all the we don't know all the
ways that we can potentially manipulate
it but really it's the human embryo and
embryonic manipulation that drives the
uh drives the concerns you're right very
is it inevitable I don't think it's
inevitable I think scientists will and
have in the past stepped up to the plate
um and created strong barricades around
what kinds of things can be done what
kind of interventions can be done um so
I think it's not it's not I think it's
not completely a uh I think people will
draw strong barricades around it you
write very candidly about the mental
illness in your own family you talk
about two uncles and you talk about a
cousin did that have anything to do with
your desire to explore this this topic
in 600 Pages well a lot of information
in your book it's a lot of information
and you know the the that was absolutely
the basis for the book you know that and
the fact that I was treating I still
treat cancer patients and I began to
experience the amazing things that you
can do with genes uh and genetics around
cancer uh you know you can diagnose
imagine being able to uh tell a woman
about her risk of future breast cancer
and being able to screen uh for that or
give her a drug to prevent breast cancer
this technology didn't exist 20 years
ago or 30 years ago we all of this now
but on the other hand we're also
grappling with the fact that there's so
many uncertainties we're using the
language of genes very Loosely you know
but what are the uncertainties what what
is the real promise and what are the
real perils that's at the center of the
book what percentage of cancers have a
genetic component well you know
ultimately all cancers are genetic
cancer is a genetic disease um and so
the question you can ask is what
percentage of Cancer's genes are
inherited from your parents and we don't
know fully the answer yet because there
are many genes that can have small
effects um whereas sometimes you know
there's one gene that can have a very
big effect just to give you one example
braa one we know about it one gene big
effect but on the other hand there are
many many women with familiar breast
cancer that families have known breast
cancer but we don't know what genes are
involved so there's both ends of the
spectrum even in that one disease breast
cancer yeah because brca1 is a single G
mutation so it's easily to determine
that just like other things like
Huntington's disease Tac disease those
would be the kinds of things you could
create some sort of genetic mutation in
order to change the future in your
family let me ask you about this you
write in your book The genome will
become a manual of previvor ship what is
previvor ship it's a complicated word
and it it's sort of entering our
vocabulary previvor ship is the idea
that you know you can look at a genome
and you can begin we're not there yet
but you can begin to ask uh questions
about what might happen in your future
so the word previvor is a kind of aelian
word that reminds us that you know we're
trying to we're going to try to predict
the future from your genetic makeup then
you become a survivor of a disease you
haven't yet had it's a weird it's a
weird idea because what you and often
you're living in the shadow of an
illness that you haven't yet had so it's
a little bit yeah it's it's a tough it's
a tough idea and we should be very
careful with that kind of idea are you
optimistic about where we are in this in
this whole study of genes and cancer and
mental
illness good place I'm optimistic as
long as as The Wider public understands
that there won't be single genes for
this there will be multiple genes with
small effects and a big role of the
environment and illnesses like this uh
there will be genetic determinants we
know that many mental illnesses have
genetic components at their very core we
know this from twin studies we know this
from a lot of studies so I think as long
as we understand that the nature of the
information is complicated that's the
that's the key last question uh you
talked about the challenge to the gene
pool as a triangle
so the triangle has you know we have to
remember that extraordinary suffering um
is one important thing we have to
evaluate I mean is the genetic disease
cause extraordinary suffering number two
is there is there a good correspondence
between the Gene and the disease in
other words like braa one you know you
have the gene there is a heightened risk
for the disease but that's not going to
be true for all other genes and number
two three probably the most important
all of this should be publicly debated
and it should be open to choice you
shouldn't have a state mandate to test
your genes or to do anything about your
genome yeah we are just at the beginning
of the legal Frontier that's a big legal
Frontier on the very issue of this Dr
Sider G great to have you here at the
table thank you very very much and the
genan goes on sale today